That would be my fool's
I spent a lot of time going to Jerusalem over the past about seven years now.
And there isn't anything in the book that isn't based on something, I mean in terms of the big picture, not in terms of the lives of the individual, but in terms of the events, in terms of events,
political events that take place, all of those are based on something that happened.
I mean, whether it's some of the drug dealing, some of the supplying of Gaza Strip
the irregulars with arms, all that stuff is pretty much based on, I mean, I've imagined my way into the details of some of it, but it's essentially based on reality.
Now this is the fifth novel, I think.
Is this the first time that you've met?
This is the sixth.
Is it the sixth?
Sixth novel and seventh book, I guess.
They were coming a lot quicker in recent years, which is... That's only sensible, yeah.
Is this the first time you've actually used actual events to... No, I mean, you know, my first book was a kind of political flat fire, in a way, in the world, and so forth.
And my second one is a Vietnam book, so there are a lot of those events in that work, again in terms of the big picture work, were true.
I think that's generally true of Flag for Sunrise.
Politics, I mean, when I write politics, I usually base it on political situations that are real.
Could you, I mean, there are any number of different titles I think you could have picked for this book.
Explain the particular pertinence of this one.
Well, Damascus Gate is, for one thing, the most beautiful gate.
It's really emblematic of the city.
If you were going to have a city feel or something, if you didn't put the Dome of the Rock on it, you'd put Damascus Gate on it.
It's also the gate leading east.
It's a case that is associated with
martyrdoms and conversions and sudden visitations.
I mean, it's the gate that all went through on the road to Damascus.
So it's got these associations with reversals and conversions.
Do you think of it in terms of a metaphor as well, or is it just a perfectly appropriate title?
Well, I think it's both.
You know, I think it's a good title, and it's a metaphor.
The metaphor is very clear for you.
Well, the metaphor is not so clear.
I mean, it's not closely bound.
It's kind of a little bit like Out of Ridge Reach, which is also, I mean, I mean it to be associative rather than directly referential.
I mean, there are associations in Out of Ridge Reach, just in the words.
And similarly, in Damascus Gate, less so in the sound of the word than in the, you know, in the word.
It's associations, I think.
Absolutely.
I think it's fair to say that these are quintessential stone characters.
Is there such a thing as a stone character?
Well, a stone character is often somewhere far away from where he belongs, he or she belongs.
doing something unlikely, but the world these days is full of people like that.
They're appropriate subjects because they represent the contemporary world in a lot of ways.
People, freelance reporters living in remote cities outside their own lives, so to speak.
people in search of something, people in search of a light, in search of a free.
There's a lot of such people, and I write about them.
So they're my quintessential characters, I guess, people who are slightly lost in search of something.
and in search of each other whether they know it or not.
Would you consider yourself a stone character?
Um, well, my life has been more stable because I've been married for a long time, and, you know, to the same man, and I think in my life, in a way, I would be a stone character, but it wasn't for a little bit of good luck.
How was looking?
When I have to do these interviews, I always say, I have to leave with my lead, and I have to leave with my food and sex.
I know sometimes you feel a little shy about asking a novelist to consider a work in the context of a corpus, but do you see an art in your career that
that really does speak for each book along the way.
I mean, books that speak for where you are in your... Well, yeah, I think so.
I mean, I like to think that I'm, you know, that I'm learning, that I'm, you know, that I'm getting better, that I'm learning, but everybody, you know, I think wants to think that, and I want to think it too, you know, that I'm learning in my business, that I'll go on continuing
to learn.
I've got, you know, what is for me, I think, more, you know, a substantial amount of work.
And I think there's a, you know, not an ongoing, not something like an ongoing story, but there is a kind of art.
I mean, we all like to think that our most recent book is our best.
You know, I'm no exception to that.
I liked Outer Bridge Reach very much.
It was very important to me.
It was very close to me.
And this, in a way, is true.
I'm so close to it, it's hard for me to distance myself and look at it.
It's just normal.
I think I'm trying to work faster.
I'm trying to make them be better.
I'm still trying to learn.
Ideally, each one should be better than the last, because I will have learned a few things between both of them.
Yeah, and that occasioned this question.
I was showing my daughter the other day.
instead of the Henry James New York edition, you know, as his performance.
And when he was doing this, he was writing these puppets, you know, as his famous.
But it also prompted him to go in and tinker with some of the early adopters, which is, you know, would you ever be tempted to make it 70-something to the New York edition of Robert Stone?
Life is too short, at least.
I mean, I don't work hard enough to be able to do that.
I...
For me, it would be, you know, I would feel like a regression.
I would feel like I ought to be doing something else.
That's, you know, what's past is that.
Completed work in your view is completed work.
Yeah, yeah.
You know, Tim O'Brien, who I have the greatest respect for, I've been with him a couple of years ago, he said that.
Very quietly, he had gone in and fooled around with Paciano, you know, from paperback, and he got a letter from a teacher, and from the course, and the teacher was reading it from the type cover, and the students were, and all of a sudden they said, we're not reading the same book.
I mean, what's going on?
But this is not something that you'd be tempted to do.
Well, that's Tim.
I mean, he's, you know, a great perfectionist.
and, oh, I don't know, I might do that.
I might do something like that.
I think if something was bothering me, you know, and there are some, there are misprints and things like that that bother me or things I would have said a little better.
I mean, I can see doing that.
I can see making a change like that.
I wouldn't go through the whole thing looking for... I mean artistic changes.
Yeah.
I wouldn't do that simply because I don't feel like the time.
Do you ever edit while you're reading, though?
I mean, like you're reading?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
And you see something that...
and you feel you can express better until you do it right there?
Yeah.
Oh, I do that all the time.
I mean, sometimes I'm thinking, hey, you know, how could I have let this get back at me?
And other times I'm thinking, hey, this is even good.
You know, it's different experiences.
You say this stuff was particularly important to you.
How is that?
Why is that?
Well, I mean, I think the character is really a lot like me in a lot of ways.
I share a lot with his character, and I don't know, he's just somewhat less.
Selfish.
I like him.
Maybe I like him better.
I don't know.
He's a nicer guy than some of the other characters.
I know when he expresses his religion as once practicing, but now I've read interviews with you that this pretty much describes your own status.
Yeah, that's true.
I mean, I've always been writing, you know, around, under, around, and so forth, religion, and this time I took it on directly.
I really find a lot of that Kabbalistic stuff, you know, sublime.
I mean, really sublime.
And I wanted to take it on, presumed to take it on directly.
He has other reflections that are on the subject of religion
you know, which are flat out, which are not indirect, but direct.
And I always kind of wanted to allow myself to do that if I could get away with it.
I thought I could get away with it, and I hope I got away with it.
Is it particularly appropriate, do you think, at this point in your life, to take one of these various things, something?
Well, it was one thing that I had to deal with.
This seems like as good a time as any.
I don't know where that's going to lead me.
I'm still sort of lost in that dimension.
So I don't know what the future holds for me.
I was trying to find out, I guess, when I read the book.
But I still feel sort of... I see.
So writing the book is an exploration for you as well.
I did an interview in London a couple of weeks with Penelope Fitzgerald.
I spent all of a sudden having the only interview with her in the United States by an American Journal of Greenhand Photographs.
I've been able to place it now in my 30th century.
She says, she never even starts a book, and she says, I have to have my first paragraph and my last paragraph.
It's very interesting.
And the title, which they always change on her.
But I said, well, that's very interesting.
By knowing your final paragraph, then you clearly know where this thing is going.
Well, she says, yeah, in her case, what I'm saying, I'm just using this as a way of asking you,
I don't think that's the case with you, where you say it is an exploration, and you know where we're doing this, and I guess where the characters are, but it's a journey for you.
That's just like a painter knowing something about the last element they're going to put in the painting.
It doesn't really mean that they know what the whole thing is going to be like.
Even if I know the ending or if I have a scene in mind near the ending, it doesn't mean I know Vanilla Holt Harriot.
I think you always should have some kind of sense of what the ending is going to be like.
of how it feels.
Even if you don't know exactly what it is and what happens and how it turns out to everybody, you have a scene in mind that you're working through.
It doesn't mean you know the narrative in advance.
It's quite a rich cast of characters, I have to say, that you have here.
Did you plan a really big book?
Well, I didn't exactly plan it, but I knew that it was going to be a big book.
Sometimes it was so big that I, you know, I was about to give up on it.
I mean, I felt, you know, hopeful.
Did you despair?
Yeah, I did.
And there were times when I said, if this isn't, you know, if I haven't got this together, and a sense of, you know, confidence by, you know, by summer or by Christmas or something, I'm going to put advantage of something else.
But I kept being drawn on.
I kept doing it.
Kept your eye on the ball.
Yeah.
The importance of story is in your work.
I mean, it's very...
Well, story is important for me.
I mean, I use plot, I use the old-fashioned realistic narrative, and if you're going to choose to do that, I mean, I don't think there's necessarily a better way of doing things than the non-realistic or post-realistic.
But it is a way, and if you want to do it, you've got to follow through on it.
You've got to follow through.
And so that's the mode that I most commonly use.
I depart from it sometimes.
I mean, some of my scenes are pretty strange and not strictly realistic, and I may do more in that direction.
In a way, some of my first novel is my least realistic, capital R.
than with the others.
The Jerusalem syndrome.
Tell me a little bit about this is an actual... Oh, that's a real, sure.
That's an actual... I agree with that.
That would be a great story for a journalist to write about.
I'd go after that with myself.
Well, I think people are out there after it.
Is that right?
Yeah.
And you became aware of it, first of all, having spent so much time there.
It sounds to me like, you know, have you developed contacts, the way you develop contacts like this?
Yeah.
Sort of.
Like six people killed a day, not five, not seven, not six a day.
Yeah.
And have you met sources like this who promise you, you know,
The real thing on those files and... Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
And so you really have to have a... Well, it doesn't always matter what's bullshit and what's not.
Sometimes, you know, sometimes it's...
You know, bullshit is, you know, perfectly fine.
It's funny.
You mentioned in New York at that lunch, you know, how Jerusalem really impresses you.
I mean, it's an ancient historical city.
But on the other hand, there is not just a sense of the past.
I wonder if you could...
Well, I always felt there was no past, that everything was about now.
Everything was about a kind of an ongoing now.
a future which is you know kind of a transcendent future and a present which is dynamic and and up for grabs but no cast i mean every all those old stones aren't really about the past and the way that if you go to you know greece or rome in a way what you're seeing
You can't say it's dead because it's still contributing to art, but it is of the past.
The mosque and the Western Wall and so forth in Jerusalem, those things are about right now.
They're going on right now.
They're actively functioning, actively being fought over.
If you dig a tunnel, you're likely to have a riot.
I mean, there is no balance.
It is amazing, isn't it?
They have all these different religious groups, all attracted to this particular place.
John Keegan has said, you know, he's traced the importance of place and the history of battles, you know.
Why have there been so many battles that are often fought in the same place?
You know, what is it about a place
And you can always say the same thing here.
I mean, originally, I mean, Jerusalem originally was important for just a reason like that.
It controls the roots going north and south, and it also overlooks
the plane towards the ocean, so it's strategically very important.
But then it began to improve this supernatural dimension.
As soon as David brought the art there, it became the home of the art.
It became this kind of theater, almost, you know, kind of a cosmic theater where human destiny was packed out on a small
scale, it became the place, you know, it became God's camp, it became God's own city.
To the Crusaders, it was, I mean, you know, there they were sitting out in the middle of, you know,
They had even the vaguest conception of where Jerusalem was or what it was like to live there.
But they were prepared to put their armor on and go out and take it because it was holy to them as a notion, as an idea.
So it's an extraordinary place and it goes on.
It goes on driving people, driving people into allegiance and intensity of the idea of reviving.
It just sort of repellents
existence I'm making at a capital.
The question of who's Jerusalem it is?
Who really, who it really belongs to?
It's an old, old bus.
Did you go there with a sense of a notion that you were there for the first time, or did you go there?
I went there kind of by accident as a tourist, because I've been doing a travel story in Egypt, and my wife and I had been, we'd been doing this trip in the desert.
We ended up in the desert, in the Sinai Desert.
We'd been out for weeks in the Land Rovers with a party of the German people.
so that we'd been in these land rovers long enough that if Rommel came around the next sand dune, you know, it wouldn't have been defrauded for like a week in the Africa Corps.
I mean, they were perfectly nuts.
But anyway, we crossed the border.
I mean, you know, we found ourselves in that corner.
So we thought, well, you know, we can go back that way.
We can work it out to go back that way.
So we crossed.
The Egyptian army lines, it wasn't just the border then, the army was sort of holding the line at the aftermath of the war.
This is back in the 1980s, but they were returning Sinai.
I guess this is the wake of the Yom Kippur War, and they're returning Sinai to Egypt in chunks, and they were just getting the last part of it back to the Egyptians.
So we ended up in our lab across the border, and then we took a bus
overnight through the Negev, which you didn't really see.
And we arrived in Jerusalem in the early morning, just when the sun was coming up.
All of the middle of Jerusalem is made with this pink stone.
I mean, even the British Mandate made that a law.
Everything built had to be built with that pink stone and master walls and so forth.
It's really beautiful.
It's a beautiful place to watch the sun come up because of the sun on the walls and the sun on the buildings.
Then I got to know it a little better and I began to recognize how many people like my people that were around.
This happens often to you.
I mean, you mentioned last time we spoke, you were up on the last day, you saw these salmon going up the stream.
That's going to figure in something and it became that wonderful.
a wonderful story.
I mean, this pretty much happens to you, doesn't it?
I mean, you go places and you say, okay, you know, this is good.
And it starts to happen.
Whatever alchemic process takes place, it starts to kick in.
And does the commitment to do a novel come first, or does the elements of a narrative?
Well, more or less the thing, you know, the author
You know, I mean, it kind of comes at once.
They come together.
I mean, the novel can exist abstractly from what makes it up, you know, what it's made of.
So it's not so much that the idea of the novel is there.
I mean, you've got to have the conception of the novel first before you can say, well, what I'll do now.
I mean, the theory is when you come to the end of the book,
You're going to start another novel.
I mean, that's the assumption.
That's my assumption.
But I have to have, you know, I need more than that to go with.
I have to, you know, I have to have something that's something that's moving, something that's important.
Making Lucas a journalist, I think, is really a session for how this novel is.
Oh, yeah.
I don't know how you could have got it.
with him being anything else.
No.
No, he has to be exposed.
He has to be trafficking and information.
He has to be dozy.
He has to meet with these kinds of people and kind of get into this mix.
I don't know what else you could have made him.
The journalist is a pretty good parent, kind of a generic character.
There's a lot.
We've covered so much of this stuff, and I did tape everything that you did in New York, so that I had to feel free to use some comments there, so I'm headed into it.
cover ground we've covered before.
You know, I'll be able to let you go real quick if you can get rid of it.
One thing I was really taken by is a quote.
Do you consider writing as a form of religion for you?
Yes.
It is
You know, it's sort of going up against, you know, the fundamental nature of things.
And it's, you know, there is in aesthetics a certain transcendent element.
You know, art is religion in a way.
At least it's as close as I can comment and organize it.
Is there any sense of explanation for you from practice or whatever where you're writing?
Well, in a traditional sense,
Yeah, that's what I mean, and that's what I want to adopt in the reader.
I mean, because whether it's a religious one or, you know, whether it's a kind of a moral one, I don't know.
The aesthetic one is just buzzed up for the moment.
What you do as an individual, you have these epiphanous moments when you're out there, and they do almost explode into being, they give you the stuff for work.
Yeah, it works.
Yeah.
What would be next on your horizon as a writer?
What areas would you like to explore?
I think, actually, I was going to do something about a missionary in Alaska in the 30s.
A novel?
I think they're funny.
Would you?
I'm sure you've got to inscribe one of these for me.
I've looked at my editor.
This is for Allen, J-L-L-E-N, peacock.
Let me give you a good tip.
I'll give you something nice about this.
He was jumping home, right?
Yeah, you heard that, yeah.
Needless to say, he's cutting me a bit of paint.